The big problem with email is the dread it induces in most of us.  Our inboxes are constantly being inundated.  And when this is placed into its context - demanding jobs, back-to-back meetings, evening calls with remote offices - the constant arrival of emails is more than a distraction, it makes work seem truly sisyphean.     

One popular way of addressing this issue is with so-called zero inbox methodologies.  These approaches encourage users to manage their email life with prioritization techniques, personal disciplines involving austerity, and you might say a kind of ritualistic cleansing.  From the outside it could be considered a little bit monastic.  But ultimately these methodologies point to a single very valuable practice: triage.  You are being asked to triage your inbox and handle messages in a particular way, giving time to important things and ignoring what you can.  There’s a host of features in every email client (folders, tags, user defined rules) to automate this task.  It makes sense for users to know about how to employ these features as part of an ongoing practice.

But why should anyone be forced to take so many corrective actions and turn managing an inbox into some sort of weird lifestyle?  The barrage of incoming messages is not the user’s fault.  He or she shouldn’t have to read about a methodology, which, if not a religious commitment, is akin to reading a user manual (bad!).  These kinds of actions should be regarded as a short term workaround and not a long term fix.

This leads us to some interesting services that have come about in the last few years.  Google Priority Inbox and Outlook Focused Inbox introduce upstream filtering to highlight messages most important to the user.  A slightly different example is [Front](https://frontapp.com/).  Services like this one (there are many) draw the burden of triage away from the individual by consolidating messages into a common inbox.  Before email has to be acted on by the individual end-user, a set of common rules can be administered, such as the determination of which end user in a group needs to take action and according to what SLAs.  

In part 2, I’ll get into this subject in greater detail with some thoughts on how shared email and other advances can improve our experience of work, help us feel less overwhelmed, and hopefully make companies much more effective in working in today’s demanding environment. 
