---
layout: post
title:  The Shared Inbox (Part 2)    
---

In a recent post, I talked about the principal problem with email: there’s just too much of it.  The common theme around product work in this area deals with automated triage.  Take Microsoft Focused Inbox: it uses machine learning to drive high priority mail to your Focused tab so that you can concentrate on the most important messages.  Similarly, Google uses machine learning in gmail to eliminate hundreds of million spam messages a day.  Today’s ML technology brings very valuable benefits to the table. We can be very thankful for that.

Don’t we wish it could end there?  The fact is, even after spam is filtered out, there remains much work for the user to do to avoid distraction, the feeling of being overwhelmed, and other side effects.  Consider a simple metric: the average number of emails per person per day.  Whatever it is, it is too many.

We can address our problem metric using another tool:  the shared inbox. [Front](https://frontapp.com/)is a good example.  With Front, I might create an inbox called "sales@scribal.io" and one called "billing@scribal.io" to handle certain types of inquiries coming from the outside world.  Next I would add Sales and Billing team members to those inboxes (these have already been set up as Front users through a simple invitation workflow).  And finally, I would create some rules that take inbound messages from the sales or billing inbox meeting some criteria I might define, and assign those to a team member to handle.  Personally I like the choices you have to balance the workload among people, for example, using a round robin style of auto-assignment.  It’s very simple to define rules in the app and you can create more complex workflows by layering rule on top of rule.

So the hope here is that shared inboxes would allow you to drive down the average number of incoming messages per person per day and that would be good for everybody’s sanity.  Of course, it never is quite that simple.  What if the average time to close one of these Billing or Sales inquiries actually increases in the process of reducing the number of messages forwarded to each person in the team?  You could see how this could easily happen.  When we effectively reduce an email’s excessive circulation by using a shared inbox, a point of failure could now appear in the guise of the assignment rules, however sophisticated.  What if, after a Billing agent receives a given message, she needs to consult others in her team before taking an appropriate action?  Then there is the need for a whole new thread in chat, other emails, or in meetings or phone calls.  And if that’s the case, and it wasn’t an issue before,  then the shared inbox concept isn’t providing a radical change to people’s experience of email after all.